(PDF) Machine learning applications in healthcare sector: An overview
HomeFinanceEconomicsPublic FinanceHealth Care SectorArticlePDF AvailableMachine learning applications in healthcare sector: An overviewDecember 2021Materials Today Proceedings 57(6245)DOI:10.1016/j.matpr.2021.12.101Authors: Virendra Kumar VermaSymbiosis Institute of Business Management (SIBM), Bengaluru Savita VermaSavita VermaThis person is not on ResearchGate, or hasn't claimed this research yet. Download full-text PDFRead full-textDownload full-text PDFRead full-textDownload citation Copy link Link copied Read full-text Download citation Copy link Link copiedCitations (31)References (49)AbstractMachine learning (ML) applications are everywhere and are used in many real-world applications. It is essential in several areas, such as healthcare and medical data protection. ML is applied to analyse medical records and disease forecasts. In our study, we review several ML algorithms, applications, techniques, opportunities, and challenges for the healthcare sector. This paper fills a research gap for efficient use of ML algorithms and applications in the healthcare sector. Discover the world's research25+ million members160+ million publication pages2.3+ billion citationsJoin for freePublic Full-text 1Content uploaded by Virendra Kumar VermaAuthor contentAll content in this area was uploaded by Virendra Kumar Verma on Aug 10, 2022 Content may be subject to copyright. 
Machine learning applications in healthcare sector: An overviewVirendra Kumar Vermaa, Savita Vermab,⇑aSustainplanet India Private Limited, Thane, Maharashtra 401107, IndiabGalgotias College of Engineering and Technology, KP-II, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201306, Indiaarticle infoArticle history:Available online xxxxKeywords:Machine learningHealthcareML applicationsPredict diseasesabstractMachine learning (ML) applications are everywhere and are used in many real-world applications. It isessential in several areas, such as healthcare and medical data protection. ML is applied to analyse med-ical records and disease forecasts. In our study, we review several ML algorithms, applications, tech-niques, opportunities, and challenges for the healthcare sector. This paper ﬁlls a research gap forefﬁcient use of ML algorithms and applications in the healthcare sector.Ó2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the scientiﬁc committee of the International Confer-ence on Innovation and Application in Science and Technology1. IntroductionMachine learning (ML) is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld with roots inmathematics, statistics, knowledge analytics and data processing,which makes deﬁning it challenging. ML is a speciﬁc type of artiﬁ-cial intelligence that gathers data from data for training. It has sev-eral branches and sub-branches at the tree’s root, so we aren’ttelling the machines where to look in this learning process [1,2].ML is the analysis of techniques and algorithms for discoveringpatterns in data. These patterns can then be used to either improveour understanding of the current environment (e.g., by identifyinginfectious risk factors) or to forecast the future (e.g., forecast whowill be infected) [3]. ML builds on ideas from optimization, statis-tics, and computer science. Practically all ML difﬁculties may bephrased as optimization problems with regard to a dataset. Accord-ing to the diagram in Fig. 1, ML can be divided into four types.These include supervised, semi-supervised, unsupervised, andreinforcement learning [4]. Supervised learning is a subsection ofML in which machines learn from well-labelled data and predictthe outcome. This suggests that input data already has the correctoutput. Semi-supervised learning uses a little amount of labelleddata and a big amount of unlabelled data to train. Semi-supervised learning is between supervised and unsupervisedlearning. Unsupervised learning uses AI algorithms to ﬁnd patternsin data sets that are neither classiﬁed nor labelled. An agent canlearn by ‘‘trial and error using feedback” from its own actionsand practices, known as reinforcement learning [2,4,5]. Duringthe forecast period of 2020 to 2027, the global healthcare AI mar-ket is predicted to develop at a CAGR of 41.4 percent, achieving$51.3 billion in value [6]. This review contributes to variousmachine learning applications, algorithms, techniques, opportuni-ties, and challenges for healthcare during the emerging ML techno-logical advancement to predict various critical and dangerousdiseases.2. Machine learning applications in healthcareThe applications of ML in healthcare are growing, and it is ben-eﬁting patients and doctors alike in numerous ways. Automatinghealthcare billing, providing medical decision support, and creat-ing medical care regulations are some of the highly popular health-care applications for ML. There are numerous examples of ML andhealthcare models being employed in medical [7,8]. Medical imag-ing diagnostics, improved radiotherapy, personalised treatment,crowdsourced data gathering, smart health records, ML-basedbehavioural modiﬁcation, clinical trials, and research are just afew examples of the wide range of ML applications in broad health-care that are currently being used today [9].The ﬁrst medical ML system has been developed to forecast crit-ical toxicities for patients undergoing radiation therapy for headand neck cancers [10]. Deep learning in healthcare ﬁnds compli-cated patterns automatically in radiology and assists radiologistsin making intelligent decisions while analysing images such asPET, MRI, CT scans, radiology reports, and conventional radiogra-phy [11]. Google’s ML applications in healthcare detected breastcancer with 89 percent accuracy, matching or exceeding radiolo-gists. These are merely a few of the numerous ML applications inhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.12.1012214-7853/Ó2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the scientiﬁc committee of the International Conference on Innovation and Application in Science and Technology⇑Corresponding author.Materials Today: Proceedings xxx (xxxx) xxxContents lists available at ScienceDirectMaterials Today: Proceedingsjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/matprPlease cite this article as: Virendra Kumar Verma and S. Verma, Machine learning applications in healthcare sector: An overview, Materials Today: Pro-ceedings, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.12.101
the healthcare sector [12]. Medical data components such as med-ical conditions, treatment plans, and medications can now beextracted from patient charts using machine learning. The aim ofML in medical data is to train machines to analyse physicianend-user speech patterns and deﬁne perspective (negation, hypo-thetical) of signiﬁcant medical terms. Negative (denies), history,and family history (spouse, mother) are the four essential negationtypes that powerful negation engine can identify. With more than500 negation terms, machine can attain 97 percent accuracy level[12]. The applications of ML are gaining traction in the industrybecause they allow businesses to run their systems without havingto spend a lot of money on expanding their infrastructure [13,14].3. ML techniques in healthcareAlgorithms used in healthcare include deep learning, regression,ensemble, decision tree, and artiﬁcial neural network algorithms.‘‘Convolutional neural networks (CNN), artiﬁcial neural network(ANN), random forest, support vector machine (SVM), and logisticregression” are widely employed in healthcare sector [14,15,16].Table 1 presents ML techniques and their applications inhealthcare.Table 2 shows various algorithms to support healthcare dataanalysis. Sarwar and Sharma discussed accuracy using Naive Bayestechniques, which is 95% with MATLAB and SQL for diabetes type-2prediction [24]. Tarmizi et al. used ANN techniques and gave a99.98% accuracy level for predicting dengue disease [25]. Karlikdeveloped Naive Bayes techniques and gave a 97% accuracy levelfor hepatitis disease [26]. Vijayarani and Dhayanand predictedthe liver disease using SVM, showing a 79.66% accuracy level,and Naive Bayes algorithms, showing a 61.28% accuracy level [27].4. Opportunities and challenges conclusionML allows us to connect existing data to future disease fore-casts. Better predictions require innovative algorithms that max-imise data information while using the best ML model.Continuous data inﬂow can help solve critical healthcare problemsand improve clinical outcomes [45,46]. These are just two majorareas where ML can help make better decisions (advanced analyt-ics and automation) and accurately detect anomalies (diagnosisand disease screening). Another is waste, fraud, abuse andimproved administrative efﬁciency in the healthcare sector[46,48].The sum of multifactorial processes we do not understand is acondition. We risk putting patients’ lives in jeopardy by feedingML algorithms inaccurate or incomplete data. Based on a falseMachine learningSemi-supervised learningUnsupervised learning Reinforcement learningSupervised learningFig. 1. Machine learning techniques.Table 1ML techniques and their applications in the healthcare sector.Sno. MachinlearningtechniquesApplications in healthcare References1 Convolutionalneural networks(CNN)Medical image understanding [15]2 Artiﬁcial neuralnetwork (ANN)Cancer prediction, clinical diagnosis,length of stay prediction, speechrecognition[14]3 Support vectormachine (SVM)Medication adherence predictor inheart failure[16]4 LogisticregressionPredict the likelihood of a patient’sreadmission[17]5 Random forest Medical data classiﬁcation [18]6 Deep neuralnetwork (DNN)Predicting depression risk [19]7 Decision tree Medical insurance fraud [20]8 K-nearestneighbor (KNN)Diagnosing heart disease [21]9 Recurrent neuralnetwork (RNN)Medical data analysis andclassiﬁcations[22]10 Naive bayes Sentimental analysis for positiveand negative reviews of the patients[23]Table 2Various algorithms for healthcare data analysis.Sno. Algorithms forhealthcareApplications in data analysis References1 Deep learningalgorithmsMedical imaging data analysis [28]2 RegressionalgorithmsMedical images clinicalvariables analysis[29]3 Ensemble algorithms Brain tumor diagnosis dataanalysis[30]4 Artiﬁcial neuralnetwork algorithmsBehavioral habits and chronicdiseases data analysis[31]5 Decision treealgorithmsHeart disease data analysis [32]6 Bayesian algorithms Heart disease data analysis [33]7 Instance-basedalgorithmsMedical databases analysis [34]8 RegularizationalgorithmsThyroid disease analysis [35]9 Dimensionalityreduction algorithmsComplex medical data analysis [36]10 Graphical Model Spine data analysis [37]11 Clustering algorithms Imbalanced medical datasetsanalysis[38]12 Natural languageprocessingElectronic medical recordanalysis[39]13 ProbabilisticalgorithmsDetects duplicate patientrecords[40]14 Fuzzy logic Risk of heart disease detectionanalysis[41]15 Association rulelearning algorithmsHeart disease factors analysis [42]16 Genetic algorithms Medical image segmentationanalysis[43]17 Reinforcementlearning algorithmsSequential decision-makingtasks analysis[44]Virendra Kumar Verma and S. Verma Materials Today: Proceedings xxx (xxxx) xxx2
assumption, any ML solution will cause more harm than good [47].A well-tested system should work as expected, but the humanbody can act and react in mysterious ways, leading to medicalerrors and misdiagnosis. This calls into question the entire MLtraining and evaluation paradigm (i.e., pre-deﬁned dataset, com-paratively dataset). We need to do a lot of testing and tuning ofhealthcare AI [46]. Ensuring data collection and processing remainsa challenge in healthcare. In fact, most generated data is siloed andnot analysable. For example, organisations collect unstructuredadministrative data like insurance claims and performance reportsbut miss out on clinical data. Medical data is a difﬁcult analyticsenvironment [47,48].5. ConclusionMachine learning (ML) is essential in healthcare sector such asmedical imaging diagnostics, improved radiotherapy, personalisedtreatment, crowdsourced data gathering, smart health records, ML-based behavioural modiﬁcation, clinical trials, and research.Healthcare is becoming more problematic and costly. It uses sev-eral ML techniques to ﬁx it. Various ML techniques and applica-tions for disease prediction are presented in this paper. Using MLalgorithms and techniques, we hope to improve the accuracy ofmany disease predictions in the future.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnan-cial interests or personal relationships that could have appearedto inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.AcknowledgementsWe conﬁrm that we did not require any type of funding fromany organizations for this review.References[1] M.I. Jordan, T.M. M, Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and prospects,Science 349 (6245) (2015 Jul 17) 255–260, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa8415.[2] X.-D. Zhang, Machine learning, in: X.-D. Zhang (Ed.), A Matrix AlgebraApproach to Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Springer, Singapore, 2020, pp. 223–440,https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-2770-8_6.[3] J. Wiens, E.S. Shenoy, Machine learning for healthcare: on the verge of a majorshift in healthcare epidemiology, Clin. Infect. Dis. 66 (1) (2018 Jan 1) 149–153,https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cix731.[4] M. Kang, N.J. Jameson, Machine Learning: Fundamentals, in: M.G. Pecht, M.Kang (Eds.), Prognostics and Health Management of Electronics:Fundamentals, Machine Learning, and the Internet of Things, John Wiley andSons Ltd, Chichester, UK, 2018, pp. 85–109, https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119515326.ch4.[5] G. Shobha, S. Rangaswamy, Machine learning. Handbook of statistics 2018 Jan1, vol. 38. Elsevier, pp. 197-228. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.host.2018.07.004.[6] Healthcare Artiﬁcial Intelligence Market- Global Forecast to 2027. https://www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/4753853/healthcare-artiﬁcial-intelligence-market-by.[7] R. Alugubelli, Exploratory Study of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Healthcare, Int. J.Innovat. Eng. Res. Technol. 3 (1) (2016) 1.[8] M.A. Musen, B. Middleton, R.A. Greenes, Clinical decision-support systems, in:Biomedical Informatics, Springer, Cham, 2021, pp. 795-840. Doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-58721-5_24.[9] K. Kalaiselvi, M. Deepika, Machine Learning for Healthcare Diagnostics, in:Machine Learning with Health Care Perspective, Springer, Cham, 2020, pp. 91–105, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-40850-3.[10] B. Bak, A. Skrobala, A. Adamska, J. Malicki, What information can we gain fromperforming adaptive radiotherapy of head and neck cancer patients from thepast 10 years?, Cancer/Radiothérapie (2021 Nov 9), https://doiorg/10.1016/j.canrad.2021.08.019.[11] A. Sarkar, Deep Learning in Medical Imaging. Knowledge Modelling and BigData Analytics in Healthcare: Advances and Applications, 2021 Dec 9:107.[12] Beneﬁts of Machine Learning in Healthcare, 2021. https://www.foreseemed.com/blog/machine-learning-in-healthcare.[13] T.M. Ghazal, M.K. Hasan, M.T. Alshurideh, H.M. Alzoubi, M. Ahmad, S.S. Akbar,B. Al Kurdi, I.A. Akour, IoT for Smart Cities: Machine learning approaches insmart healthcare—a review, Future Internet. 13 (8) (2021 Aug) 218, https://doi.org/10.3390/ﬁ13080218.[14] N. Shahid, T. Rappon, W. Berta, O. Uthman, Applications of artiﬁcial neuralnetworks in health care organizational decision-making: A scoping review,PLoS ONE 14 (2) (2019 Feb 19) e0212356, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0212356.[15] D.R. Sarvamangala, R.V. Kulkarni, Convolutional neural networks in medicalimage understanding: a survey, Evol. Intel. 3 (2021 Jan) 1–22, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12065-020-00540-3.[16] Y.J. Son, H.G. Kim, E.H. Kim, S. Choi, S.K. Lee, Application of support vectormachine for prediction of medication adherence in heart failure patients,Healthcare Inform. Res. 16 (4) (2010 Dec 31) 253–259, https://doi.org/10.4258/hir.2010.16.4.253.[17] P. Kulkarni, L.D. Smith, K.F. Woeltje, Assessing risk of hospital readmissions forimproving medical practice, Health Care Manage. Sci. 19 (3) (2016 Sep) 291–299, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10729-015-9323-5.[18] M.Z. Alam, M.S. Rahman, M.S. Rahman, A Random Forest based predictor formedical data classiﬁcation using feature ranking, Inf. Med. Unlocked 1 (15)(2019 Jan), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imu.2019.100180 100180.[19] J.W. Baek, K. Chung, Context deep neural network model for predictingdepression risk using multiple regression, IEEE Access 21 (8) (2020 Jan)18171–18181, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2968393.[20] F. SoleimanianGharehchopogh, P. Mohammadi, P. Hakimi, Application ofdecision tree algorithm for data mining in healthcare operations: A case study,Int. J. Comput. Appl. 52 (6) (2012) 21–26.[21] I.K. Enriko, M. Suryanegara, D. Gunawan, Heart Disease Diagnosis System withk-Nearest Neighbors Method Using Real Clinical Medical Records, in:Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Frontiers of EducationalTechnologies, 2018 Jun 25, pp. 127-131. https://doi.org/10.1145/3233347.3233386.[22] H. Al-Askar, N. Radi, Á. MacDermott, Recurrent neural networks in medicaldata analysis and classiﬁcations, Applied Computing in Medicine and Health,Morgan Kaufmann, 2016 Jan 1, pp. 147-165. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803468-2.00007-2.[23] K. Chakrapani, M. Kempanna, S.M. Iqubal, K. Thyagarajan, M. Ramachandran,V. Bhaskar, A. Kumar, An Enhanced Exploration of Sentimental Analysis inHealth Care. Doi: https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-620229/v1.[24] A. Sarwar, V. Sharma, Intelligent Naïve Bayes Approach to Diagnose DiabetesType-2. Special Issue of International Journal of Computer Applications (0975-8887) on Issues and Challenges in Networking, Intelligence and ComputingTechnologies-ICNICT 2012, 3, 14-16. https://www.ijcaonline.org/specialissues/icnict/number3/9030-1043.[25] N.D. Tarmizi, F. Jamaluddin, A. Abu Bakar, Z.A. Othman, S. Zainudin, A.R.Hamdan, Malaysia dengue outbreak detection using data mining models, J.Next Generat. Inform. Technol. (JNIT) 4 (6) (2013 Aug) 96–107.[26] B. Karlik, Hepatitis Disease Diagnosis Using Back Propagation and the NaiveBayes Classiﬁers, J. Sci. Technol. 1 (2011) 49–62.[27] S. Vijayarani, S. Dhayanand, Liver disease prediction using SVM and NaïveBayes algorithms, Int. J. Sci., Eng. Technol. Res. (IJSETR) 4 (4) (2015 Apr) 816–820.[28] J. Latif, C. Xiao, A. Imran, S. Tu, Medical imaging using machine learning anddeep learning algorithms: a review, in: 2019 2nd International Conference onComputing, Mathematics and Engineering Technologies (iCoMET), IEEE, 2019Jan 30, pp. 1-5. Doi: 10.1109/ICOMET.2019.8673502.[29] Y. Wang, Y. Fan, P. Bhatt, C. Davatzikos, High-dimensional pattern regressionusing machine learning: from medical images to continuous clinical variables,Neuroimage 50 (4) (2010 May 1) 1519–1535, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.092.[30] S. Huda, J. Yearwood, H.F. Jelinek, M.M. Hassan, G. Fortino, M. Buckland, Ahybrid feature selection with ensemble classiﬁcation for imbalancedhealthcare data: A case study for brain tumor diagnosis, IEEE Access 4(2016) 9145–9154, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2647238.[31] V. Raghupathi, W. Raghupathi, Preventive healthcare: A neural networkanalysis of behavioral habits and chronic diseases, in: Healthcare,Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 2017 Mar, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 8.https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare5010008.[32] S. Maji, S. Arora, Decision tree algorithms for prediction of heart disease.Information and Communication Technology for Competitive Strategies,Springer, Singapore, 2019, pp. 447-454. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-0586-3_45.[33] A.N. Repaka, S.D. Ravikanti, R.G. Franklin, Design and implementing heartdisease prediction using naives Bayesian, 2019 3rd International conferenceon trends in electronics and informatics (ICOEI), IEEE, 2019 Apr 23, pp. 292-297. Doi: 10.1109/ICOEI.2019.8862604.[34] F. Gagliardi, Instance-based classiﬁers applied to medical databases: diagnosisand knowledge extraction, Artif. Intell. Med. 52 (3) (2011 Jul 1) 123–139,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artmed.2011.04.002.[35] V. Prasad, T.S. Rao, P.P. Reddy, Improvised prophecy using regularizationmethod of machine learning algorithms on medical data, Personalized Med.Universe 5 (2016) 32–40, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmu.2015.09.001.[36] M. Zhu, J. Xia, M. Yan, G. Cai, J. Yan, G. Ning, Dimensionality reduction incomplex medical data: Improved self-adaptive niche genetic algorithm,Comput. Math. Methods Med. 2015 (2015) 1–12, https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/794586.Virendra Kumar Verma and S. Verma Materials Today: Proceedings xxx (xxxx) xxx3
[37] S. Schmidt, J. Kappes, M. Bergtholdt, V. Pekar, S. Dries, D. Bystrov, C. Schnörr,Spine detection and labeling using a parts-based graphical model, in: BiennialInternational Conference on Information Processing in Medical Imaging,Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007 Jul 2, pp. 122-133. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-73273-0_11.[38] K. Polat, Similarity-based attribute weighting methods via clusteringalgorithms in the classiﬁcation of imbalanced medical datasets, NeuralComput. Appl. 30 (3) (2018 Aug) 987–1013, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-018-3471-8.[39] H.J. Murff, F. FitzHenry, M.E. Matheny, N. Gentry, K.L. Kotter, K. Crimin, R.S.Dittus, A.K. Rosen, P.L. Elkin, S.H. Brown, T. Speroff, Automated identiﬁcation ofpostoperative complications within an electronic medical record using naturallanguage processing, JAMA 306 (8) (2011 Aug 24) 848–855.https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-abstract/1108490.[40] J.M. Finney, A.S. Walker, T.E. Peto, D.H. Wyllie, An efﬁcient record linkagescheme using graphical analysis for identiﬁer error detection, BMC Med. Inf.Decis. Making 11 (1) (2011 Dec) 1–2, https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6947-11-7.[41] J. Kaur, B.S. Khehra, Fuzzy Logic and Hybrid based Approaches for the Risk ofHeart Disease Detection: State-of-the-Art Review, J. Inst. Eng. (India): Ser. BAug 2 (2021) 1–7.[42] J. Nahar, T. Imam, K.S. Tickle, Y.P. Chen, Association rule mining to detectfactors which contribute to heart disease in males and females, Expert Syst.Appl. 40 (4) (2013 Mar 1) 1086–1093, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2012.08.028.[43] U. Maulik, Medical image segmentation using genetic algorithms, IEEE Trans.Inf. Technol. Biomed. 13 (2) (2009 Mar 4) 166–173, https://doi.org/10.1109/TITB.2008.2007301.[44] O. Gottesman, F. Johansson, M. Komorowski, A. Faisal, D. Sontag, F. Doshi-Velez, L.A. Celi, Guidelines for reinforcement learning in healthcare, Nat. Med.25 (1) (2019 Jan) 16–18, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0310-5.[45] S.K. Deshmukh, Machine Learning for Healthcare: Emerging Challenges andOpportunities in Disease Diagnosis, J. Cell. Signaling. (2020) 1(3). https://www.scientiﬁcarchives.com/article/machine-learning-for-healthcare-emerging-challenges-and-opportunities-in-disease-diagnosis.[46] A. Nayyar, L. Gadhavi, N. Zaman, Machine learning in healthcare: review,opportunities and challenges, Machine Learn. Internet Med. Things Healthcare1 (2021 Jan) 23–45, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-821229-5.00011-2.[47] M. McComb, R. Bies, M. Ramanathan, Machine learning in pharmacometrics:Opportunities and challenges, Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. (2021 Feb 26), https://doi.org/10.1111/bcp.14801.[48] N. Mehta, A. Pandit, S. Shukla, Transforming healthcare with big data analyticsand artiﬁcial intelligence: A systematic mapping study, J. Biomed. Inform. 1(100) (2019 Dec), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103311 103311.Virendra Kumar Verma and S. Verma Materials Today: Proceedings xxx (xxxx) xxx4
Citations (31)References (49)... There are various types of ML methods, among that supervised learning, unsupervised and semi-supervised and reinforcement learning methods are the main methods. Now, with the availability of sufficient number data of respective fields and high computational systems, it becomes easy to apply ML models and train them very efficiently (Verma & Verma, 2022). Due to the availability of different forms of biomedical data such as omics, image and signal data.  ...... Extracting significant information from a bulk of data using general methods is very tedious and time taking process, but with the use of ML it is very fast and efficient (1 2022 significance of ML in healthcare.pdf', no date), (Sarker, 2021), (Verma & Verma, 2022). The ML technique is a powerful and intelligent tool to look insight the data and have the ability to extract significant information from that.  ...... For instance, to develop a data-driven intelligent healthcare system using ML, the significant medical data (clinical data, patient data, and drug data etc.) can be used (Sarker, 2021), (Verma & Verma, 2022). Substantial amount of data for optimal learning of machines is termed as Big-Data.  ...Machine Learning Solutions in Smart Healthcare: Features, Applications, and ChallengesChapterSep 2024 Vivek Patel Vijayshri ChaurasiaEbtasam Ahmad Siddiqui Rajesh MahadevaMachine learning (ML) techniques are widely used in medical practices and progressively evolving to make faster and more efficient systems. Recent advancements in ML are being done to make healthcare system more intelligent. In the current perspective the conventional healthcare system is directly dependent on hospitals and clinics, which is proven insufficient. Healthcare is one of the most growing areas where ML playing remarkable role as a solution to make automated and efficient framework. However, the ML based healthcare system is dependent on substantial data for healthy learning of it. In addition to this internet of things (IoT) can help to make a global healthcare platform. Although there is very limited medical data is available for training of ML healthcare system. In this chapter, we describe the current advances in ML technologies and their applications in healthcare.ViewShow abstract... Machine learning algorithms to predict maternal health risk ML applications are widely spreading across all areas, including healthcare, owing to their ability to model linear and nonlinear relationships [25,26]. Exploring the predictors of maternal mortality and pregnancy health risks using new technologies such as ML and AI is necessary in modern life [27].  ...... The identification of new innovative predictive methods is necessary to identify high-risk pregnant women in Oman. ML applications are widely spreading across all areas including, healthcare due to their ability to model complex linear and nonlinear relationships [25,26]. Therefore, this paper explores several ML algorithms for predicting the level of maternal risk (low or high) for maternal mortality using real de-identified data from the health information system in Oman.  ...Predicting maternal risk level using machine learning modelsArticleFull-text availableDec 2024Sulaiman Salim Al MashrafiLaleh TafakoriMali AbdollahianBackground
Maternal morbidity and mortality remain critical health concerns globally. As a result, reducing the maternal mortality ratio (MMR) is part of goal 3 in the global sustainable development goals (SDGs), and previously, it was an important indicator in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Therefore, identifying high-risk groups during pregnancy is crucial for decision-makers and medical practitioners to mitigate mortality and morbidity. However, the availability of accurate predictive models for maternal mortality and maternal health risks is challenging. Compared with traditional predictive models, machine learning algorithms have emerged as promising predictive modelling methods providing accurate predictive models.
Methods
This work aims to explore the potential of machine learning (ML) algorithms in maternal risk level prediction using a nationwide maternal mortality dataset from Oman for the first time. A total of 402 maternal deaths from 1991 to 2023 in Oman were included in this study. We utilised principal component analysis (PCA) in the ML algorithms and compared them to the results of model performance without PCA. We employed and compared ten ML algorithms, including decision tree (DT), random forest (RF), K—Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Naïve Bayes (NB), Extreme Gradient Boosting (xgboost), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Quadratic Discriminant Analysis (QDA), Logistic Regression (LR), Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Artificial Neural Network (ANN). Different metrics, including, accuracy, sensitivity, precision, and the F1- score, were utilised to assess Model performance.
Results
The results indicated that the RF model outperformed the other methods in predicting the risk level (low or high) with an accuracy of 75.2%, precision of 85.7% and F1- score of 73% after PCA was applied.
Conclusions
We applied several machine learning models to predict maternal risk levels for the first time using real data from Oman. RF outperformed the other algorithms in this classification problem. A reliable estimate of maternal risk level would facilitate intervention plans for medical practitioners to reduce maternal death.ViewShow abstract... (SVMs) [42], K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) [43,44], Naïve Bayes (NB) [42,43], Logistic Regression (LR) [44], etc. Each one of these algorithms has its own pros and cons and selecting the optimal algorithm is fully related to the type of the problem to be solved (classification, regression…) and other factors such as: accuracy (ability of a model to correctly predict an output), speediness (time consumed in order to obtain the output prediction), training data's size (The bigger the relevant data are, the more reliable the predictions normally will be.),  ...... (SVMs) [42], K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) [43,44], Naïve Bayes (NB) [42,43], Logistic Regression (LR) [44], etc. Each one of these algorithms has its own pros and cons and selecting the optimal algorithm is fully related to the type of the problem to be solved (classification, regression…) and other factors such as: accuracy (ability of a model to correctly predict an output), speediness (time consumed in order to obtain the output prediction), training data's size (The bigger the relevant data are, the more reliable the predictions normally will be.),  ...Empowering Medical Diagnosis: A Machine Learning Approach for Symptom-Based Health CheckerArticleFull-text availableAug 2024MOBILE NETW APPLLeila Aissaoui FerhiManel Ben Amar Fethi Choubani Ridha BouallegueAI-powered health checkers and apps for automated medical diagnosis have a lot of promise for a variety of applications. During pandemics, they can lessen the need for in-person patient-doctor interactions and offer vital medical advice in neglected rural areas. In this work, we demonstrate the creation of an expert system driven by machine learning on the web. This technology helps medical practitioners make better diagnostic decisions by supporting them and by offering accurate health forecasts and suggestions to the general population. Due to the lack of authentic medical datasets focusing on symptoms, we collected information from reputable medical sources. This enabled us to prioritize the medical diagnostic process, resulting in the compilation of a comprehensive list of illnesses and associated symptoms. This dataset played a key role in developing our health checker, which consisted of four primary parts: FrontEnd, Authentication module, BackEnd housing the machine learning module, and the Database. We constructed a dataset encompassing up to 415712 synthetic patients, 75 symptoms and risk factors, and 22 cough-related diagnoses. This dataset enabled the training and testing of supervised machine learning models to identify the most effective algorithm for implementation. The accuracy, performance and generalization ability of the utilized machine learning models were assessed using metrics including accuracy, F1-score and cross validation. Our work not only advances machine learning models but also addresses the pressing need for reliable medical datasets. The outcome of our efforts is a robust health checker, set to bring positive changes to diagnostic processes and healthcare accessibility as well as generalization and real-world applicability of our models. This highlights the critical role of dataset quality, especially with our ‘third dataset’ showcasing unparalleled performance across diverse medical scenarios with an accuracy superior to 99% and F1 score superior to 99% also for all the models. Stratified fivefold cross-validation also demonstrates positive results with an average accuracy and an average F1 score exceeding 99% for all models, thereby enhancing the reliability of our model evaluations and boosting confidence in the obtained metrics. In conclusion, our work propels the advancement of machine learning models, specifically addressing the imperative for reliable medical datasets. The result is a symptom-based health checker that demonstrates resilience, positioned to potentially contribute to advancements in diagnostics and improve accessibility to healthcare services.ViewShow abstract... Machine learning (ML) is a subfield of artificial intelligence that uses algorithms trained on data sets to create self-learning models. 17 These models can automatically predict outcomes, classify information, and perform tasks that would otherwise require human intervention. The applications of ML in health are evolving fast.  ...... The applications of ML in health are evolving fast. 17 However, the usefulness of these algorithms for human research is less clear. Explainability refers to the ability to understand and interpret the ML model's outcomes.  ...Tools for Data AnalysisArticleJun 2024 Santiago Perez-Lloret Alejandro Enet Gabriela Gonzalez AlemanView... ML methods have been increasingly used in various health care apps [106]. In the studies in our review, ML methods were mainly used for detecting and classifying patient hand posture, analyzing and classifying behavior patterns (ie, tremor, bradykinesia, and ROM), and identifying disease severity and prediction.  ...Smartphone-Based Hand Function Assessment: Systematic ReviewArticleFull-text availableSep 2024J MED INTERNET RES Yan FuYuxin Zhang Bing Ye Alex MihailidisBackground
Hand function assessment heavily relies on specific task scenarios, making it challenging to ensure validity and reliability. In addition, the wide range of assessment tools, limited and expensive data recording, and analysis systems further aggravate the issue. However, smartphones provide a promising opportunity to address these challenges. Thus, the built-in, high-efficiency sensors in smartphones can be used as effective tools for hand function assessment.
Objective
This review aims to evaluate existing studies on hand function evaluation using smartphones.
Methods
An information specialist searched 8 databases on June 8, 2023. The search criteria included two major concepts: (1) smartphone or mobile phone or mHealth and (2) hand function or function assessment. Searches were limited to human studies in the English language and excluded conference proceedings and trial register records. Two reviewers independently screened all studies, with a third reviewer involved in resolving discrepancies. The included studies were rated according to the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool. One reviewer extracted data on publication, demographics, hand function types, sensors used for hand function assessment, and statistical or machine learning (ML) methods. Accuracy was checked by another reviewer. The data were synthesized and tabulated based on each of the research questions.
Results
In total, 46 studies were included. Overall, 11 types of hand dysfunction–related problems were identified, such as Parkinson disease, wrist injury, stroke, and hand injury, and 6 types of hand dysfunctions were found, namely an abnormal range of motion, tremors, bradykinesia, the decline of fine motor skills, hypokinesia, and nonspecific dysfunction related to hand arthritis. Among all built-in smartphone sensors, the accelerometer was the most used, followed by the smartphone camera. Most studies used statistical methods for data processing, whereas ML algorithms were applied for disease detection, disease severity evaluation, disease prediction, and feature aggregation.
Conclusions
This systematic review highlights the potential of smartphone-based hand function assessment. The review suggests that a smartphone is a promising tool for hand function evaluation. ML is a conducive method to classify levels of hand dysfunction. Future research could (1) explore a gold standard for smartphone-based hand function assessment and (2) take advantage of smartphones’ multiple built-in sensors to assess hand function comprehensively, focus on developing ML methods for processing collected smartphone data, and focus on real-time assessment during rehabilitation training. The limitations of the research are 2-fold. First, the nascent nature of smartphone-based hand function assessment led to limited relevant literature, affecting the evidence’s completeness and comprehensiveness. This can hinder supporting viewpoints and drawing conclusions. Second, literature quality varies due to the exploratory nature of the topic, with potential inconsistencies and a lack of high-quality reference studies and meta-analyses.ViewShow abstract... Advanced materials have the potential to help us move toward a future that is more technologically sophisticated, sustainable, and resilient, with responsible development and a dedication to addressing issues [28]. Machine learning algorithms applied to advanced materials will quickly discover and optimise novel compounds for personalised healthcare in the future, completely changing treatment approaches and drug development [29].  ...Applications and potential of advanced materials: An overviewArticleFull-text availableMay 2024 Virendra Kumar VermaSavita VermaThis overview briefly describes the applications and potential of advanced materials. Highlighting the versatility of these materials across diverse domains, from powering electronics and enhancing aircraft performance to revolutionizing healthcare and sustaining renewable energy solutions, emphasizes their profound utility and impact. This overview illuminates the potential future prospects of advanced materials by examining their unique features and developing capabilities, highlighting their critical role in influencing technological breakthroughs and tackling global concerns. This review fills the research gap between efficient uses of advanced materials in medicine, space exploration, sustainable energy, wearable technology, and environmental remediation, and also discusses future prospects.
Keywords: 
Applications; Capabilities; Potential; Sustainability; Advanced materialsViewShow abstract... Supervised, semi-supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning are the major learning methods used in ML. In layman's terms, ML algorithms are fed with raw data, data that are labeled (input/output, cause/effect), or with unlabeled data; either way, ML identifies hidden patterns and allows classification/regression (supervised) grouping/clustering (unsupervised) [81]. Supervised learning uses a labeled dataset with identified features and targets, and unsupervised datasets use unlabeled (raw) data where the algorithm determines the best features and target [82].  ...Machine Learning Mediated Advanced Phage and Antimicrobial Therapy- A Futuristic ApproachArticleFull-text availableDec 2023 Aarcha S MManali Manik Patil Godhuli Kundu Kaushik RajaramThe emergence of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) has overwhelmed the contemporary curatives and have turned into one of the major challenges in the biomedical sector. With increasing deaths being associated with AMR every year; early detection of pathogens and development of novel drugs and alternative therapies, have all become ad hoc in diagnosis, prognosis and patient survival. Bacteriophage therapy remains a viable strategy to counteract AMR, yet unduly restrained by phage resistance. Phage infection is a natural phenomenon and can be widely manipulated in vitro using advanced techniques including the CRISPR/Cas systems which renders phage therapy an upper hand in comparison to conventional drugs. Phage identification, host range detection, determination of phage-receptor binding efficiency, adsorption rate, phage genome analysis are crucial stages in phage selection and phage cocktail preparation and moreover pivotal in flourishing phage therapy. The ascent of translational research and omics has allowed the development of quick, reliable and precise strategies for phage-based diagnosis and treatment techniques. However, in vitro evaluation of AMR and phage factors as well as storing, processing and analyzing large laboratory data outputs are expensive, time-consuming and labor-intensive. Machine learning (ML) is a utilitarian strategy to organize, store, analyze data sets and more importantly allows prediction of certain features by recognizing patterns in the data sets. With the huge number of research been carried out around the globe and enormous data sets being published and stored in databases, ML can utilize the available data to perform and guide in developing alternative therapeutics. Several ML based tools have been developed to predict resistance in host, phage grouping for cocktail preparation, resistance and lysogenic genes detection, phage genomic evaluation and to understand phage-host interactions. ML also allows the in silico analysis of large samples (drug/phage) and reduces sample size for in vitro evaluation thereby reducing overall costs, time and labor. The present review summarizes the available ML algorithms and corresponding databases used in AMR and phage research. It also emphasizes the status quo of antimicrobial and phage resistance in the healthcare sector and analyses the role of ML in analyzing biological databases in order to predict possible phage/drug-host interaction patterns, phage susceptibility, suitability of phage strains for therapy and recommends the most efficient drug combinations and treatment strategies.ViewShow abstractEnhancing CNN Inference Time and Reducing Latency on Edge and Resource-Constrained Systems through QuantizationConference PaperAug 2024Gaurav UpadhyayC Siva PrasadAkash VSunil Alias BalwantraoViewEnhancing and Implementation of ML in Healthcare SectorArticleFull-text availableMay 2024Dr. Mahesh PanjwaniSahil LokhandeRhutwik GaidhaniPrathmesh MathankarThis research paper explores the transformative impact of machine learning (ML) on the healthcare industry, particularly through the emergence of ML-driven health and medical platforms. With the ongoing shift from offline to online shopping, the future of healthcare is envisioned to heavily rely on specialized online doctor consultations and pharmacies. Leveraging ML technologies, these platforms offer personalized services such as real-time video consultations, appointment scheduling, prescription management, and health record maintenance, ultimately prioritizing safety and convenience. This paper elucidates the potential of ML in optimizing patient care, expediting processes, and enhancing decision-making in healthcare. Additionally, it delves into the global trend of online medicine purchasing, highlighting its advantages and examining its impact on the Indian healthcare market.ViewShow abstractNeural Network-based Classification of Alzheimer's Disease using MRI: A Comparative Performance AnalysisConference PaperFeb 2024Fayza Rizka Zalianty Deminar Rut El Shaday Sirait Inung Wijayanto Sugondo HadiyosoViewShow moreWhat information can we gain from performing adaptive radiotherapy of head and neck cancer patients from the past 10 years?ArticleFull-text availableNov 2021CANCER RADIOTHER Bartosz BąkAgnieszka Skrobała Anna Adamska Julian MalickiThe aim of the review was to present the current literature status about replanning regarding anatomical and dosimetric changes in the target and OARs in the head and neck region during radiotherapy, to discuss and to analyze factors influencing the decision for adaptive radiotherapy of head and neck cancer patients. Significant progress has been made in head and neck patients’ evaluation and qualification for adapted radiotherapy over the past ten years. Many factors leading to anatomical and dosimetric changes during treatment have been identified. Based on the literature, the most common factors triggering re-plan are weight loss, tumor and nodal changes, and parotid glands shrinkage. The fluctuations in dose distribution in the clinical area are significant predictive factors for patients’ quality of life and the possibility of recovery. It has been shown that re-planning influence clinical outcomes: local control, disease free survival and overall survival. Regarding literature studies, it seems that adaptive radiotherapy would be the most beneficial for tumors of immense volume or those in the nearest proximity of the OARs. All researchers agree that the timing of re-planning is a crucial challenge, and there are still no clear consensus guidelines for time or criteria of re-planning. Nowadays, thanks to significant technological progress, the decision is mostly made based on observation and supported with IGRT verification. Although further research is still needed, adaptive strategies are evolving and now became the state of the art of modern radiotherapy.ViewShow abstractIoT for Smart Cities: Machine Learning Approaches in Smart Healthcare-A ReviewArticleFull-text availableAug 2021 Taher M. Ghazal Mohammad Kamrul Hasan Muhammad Turki Alshurideh Iman AkourSmart city is a collective term for technologies and concepts that are directed toward making cities efficient, technologically more advanced, greener and more socially inclusive. These concepts include technical, economic and social innovations. This term has been tossed around by various actors in politics, business, administration and urban planning since the 2000s to establish tech-based changes and innovations in urban areas. The idea of the smart city is used in conjunction with the utilization of digital technologies and at the same time represents a reaction to the economic, social and political challenges that post-industrial societies are confronted with at the start of the new millennium. The key focus is on dealing with challenges faced by urban society, such as environ- mental pollution, demographic change, population growth, healthcare, the financial crisis or scarcity of resources. In a broader sense, the term also includes non-technical innovations that make urban life more sustainable. So far, the idea of using IoT-based sensor networks for healthcare applications is a promising one with the potential of minimizing inefficiencies in the existing infrastructure. A machine learning approach is key to successful implementation of the IoT-powered wireless sensor networks for this purpose since there is large amount of data to be handled intelligently. Throughout this paper, it will be discussed in detail how AI-powered IoT and WSNs are applied in the healthcare sector. This research will be a baseline study for understanding the role of the IoT in smart cities, in particular in the healthcare sector, for future research works.ViewShow abstractAn Enhanced Exploration of Sentimental Analysis in Health CarePreprintFull-text availableJun 2021Kannan Chakrapani Kempanna Muniyegowda Safa Iqubal Ambeshwar KumarThe medical dataset replicates the patient's crucial information, such as important details regarding the patient's health. It includes disease diagnoses, interventions, and descriptions of the examined results. Also, detecting the mindset of an acute disease-affected patient is a primary challenging task. Though sentiment analysis plays a role in seeing their perspective, the significant broad medical application does not yet meet the analysis of patient mindset. So here we identified major shortcoming exists while studies the diversified disease-affected people mindset. Hence, we introduce a practical framework to analyse patients' perspectives using a socio-medical dataset that contains various reviews and feedback of critical diseases-affected people—initially, we applied a pre-processing technique, including Lowercase Conversion, removing special characters, removing stop words, Number to word conversion, Stemming, and lemmatization over dataset. Next, N-gram tokenization methodology is used to extract the valuable features followed by assigning polarity score to each sentiment we extract and calculate the overall polarity of the context. Finally, a probabilistic LDA model was employed to combine the review. Furthermore, various machine learning classifiers are explored to evaluate the performance of the proposed framework.ViewShow abstractMachine learning in pharmacometrics: Opportunities and challengesArticleFull-text availableMar 2021BRIT J CLIN PHARMACO Mason McCombRobert BiesMurali RamanathanThe explosive growth in medical devices, imaging and diagnostics, computing, and communication and information technologies in drug development and healthcare has created an ever‐expanding data landscape that the pharmacometrics (PMX) research community must now traverse. The tools of machine learning (ML) have emerged as a powerful computational approach in other data‐rich disciplines but its effective utilization in the pharmaceutical sciences and PMX modelling is in its infancy. ML‐based methods can complement PMX modelling by enabling the information in diverse sources of big data, e.g. population‐based public databases and disease‐specific clinical registries, to be harnessed because they are capable of efficiently identifying salient variables associated with outcomes and delineating their interdependencies. ML algorithms are computationally efficient, have strong predictive capabilities and can enable learning in the big data setting. ML algorithms can be viewed as providing a computational bridge from big data to complement PMX modelling. This review provides an overview of the strengths and weaknesses of ML approaches vis‐à‐vis population methods, assesses current research into ML applications in the pharmaceutical sciences and provides perspective for potential opportunities and strategies for the successful integration and utilization of ML in PMX.ViewShow abstractConvolutional neural networks in medical image understanding: a surveyArticleFull-text availableMar 2022 Sarvamangala d r Raghavendra V. KulkarniImaging techniques are used to capture anomalies of the human body. The captured images must be understood for diagnosis, prognosis and treatment planning of the anomalies. Medical image understanding is generally performed by skilled medical professionals. However, the scarce availability of human experts and the fatigue and rough estimate procedures involved with them limit the effectiveness of image understanding performed by skilled medical professionals. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are effective tools for image understanding. They have outperformed human experts in many image understanding tasks. This article aims to provide a comprehensive survey of applications of CNNs in medical image understanding. The underlying objective is to motivate medical image understanding researchers to extensively apply CNNs in their research and diagnosis. A brief introduction to CNNs has been presented. A discussion on CNN and its various award-winning frameworks have been presented. The major medical image understanding tasks, namely image classification, segmentation, localization and detection have been introduced. Applications of CNN in medical image understanding of the ailments of brain, breast, lung and other organs have been surveyed critically and comprehensively. A critical discussion on some of the challenges is also presented.ViewShow abstractMachine learning in healthcare: review, opportunities and challengesChapterJan 2021 Anand Nayyar Lata Gadhavi Gadhavi Noor Zaman JhanjhiViewDeep Learning in Medical ImagingChapterOct 2021Arjun SarkarViewExploratory Study of Artificial Intelligence in HealthcareArticleJan 2016Raghunandan AlugubelliThe rise of artificial intelligence has brought a positive shift in the sector by providing accurate data-driven decisions. The data from large systems is used for the early detection of chronic illnesses. These illnesses include cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases, etc. Existing technology is limited in terms of medical diagnosis etc. With the advent of ML/AI in the healthcare system, we expect to see much automation in clinical decision-making. We illustrate popular machine learning algorithms, their applications followed by methodology. This research will focus on the impact of Artificial Intelligence applications on the healthcare sector, its history, challenges, and concerns in the medical field. BACKGROUND INFORMATION Fostering trust in AI systems is a tremendous obstacle to bringing the most transformative AI technologies into reality, such as large-scale integration of machine intelligence in medicine. The challenge is to implement guiding ethical principles and aspirations and make the responsible practice of AI accessible, reproducible, and achievable for all who engage with the AI system. Meeting this challenge is critical to ensuring that medical professionals are prepared to correctly leverage AI in their practice and, ultimately, save lives. This research will concentrate on the influence AI applications have on the healthcare sector, its need, and its history in the medical field. Artificial intelligence models will assist doctors in various applications like patient care and administrative operations. (2011, March) Plant, R. et. al. According to the National Academies of Science, Engineering-diagnostic mistakes lead to roughly 10% of patient fatalities and 6 to 17% of hospital problems. It's crucial to remember that diagnostic errors aren't always caused by poor physician performance. Diagnostic mistakes, according to experts, are caused by a number of causes, including: • Collaboration and integration of health information technology are inefficient (Health IT) • Communication breakdowns between physicians, patients, and their families • A healthcare work system that is designed to be insufficiently supportive of diagnostic procedures.ViewShow abstractFuzzy Logic and Hybrid based Approaches for the Risk of Heart Disease Detection: State-of-the-Art ReviewArticleAug 2021Jagmohan KaurBaljit S. KhehraArtificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Fuzzy Logic, Neural Network, Genetic Algorithm and their hybrid systems play vital role in the medical sciences to diagnose various diseases efficiently in the patients. The problems related to the heart are widely comon in today’s world. The risk of heart failure develops due to the narrowness and blockage in the coronary arteries of the heart as excess cholesterol deposits in the arteries and blood vessels that results in fatigue, chest pain, dyspnoea, sleeping difficulties and depression. This research aims to explore diverse work done on FL and Hybrid-based techniques to identify the risk of heart disease among the patients. The present study reveals publications along with the strength, operating system, accuracy rate and other specifications used in the identification of heart disease based on FL and Hybrid-based approaches since 2010. This survey contributes motivation for research scholars to generate more innovative ideas and continue their research work in the respective field. Moreover, the future model for direct service of the patients from old age homes to the Intensive Care Unit through ambulance services is also presented in this paper.ViewShow abstractClinical Decision-Support SystemsChapterJun 2021 Mark Alan Musen Blackford Middleton Robert A. GreenesThis chapter discusses information technology that provides health-care workers and patients with situation-specific advice that can inform their decision making. The intricacies of the clinical environment, new legislative mandates, and the increasing complexity of medical practice all escalate the demand for clinical decision-support systems (CDSS) that can deliver tailored information at the right time and in the right context. The chapter describes methods for building CDSSs, which include context-specific information retrieval, grouping information within order sets, learning from data, and the use of declarative knowledge representations. The landscape for deploying CDSS technology is evolving rapidly, and the chapter discusses current standards and challenges for CDSS implementation. It concludes with a presentation of opportunities for future research.ViewShow abstractShow moreRecommended publicationsDiscover more about: Health Care SectorConference PaperDiagnosify: Multidisease Forecast - An Integrated Machine Learning Approach for Disease Prediction a...May 2024Prayag RajwadeSuchitra Pratap SinghRupinder KaurRead moreArticleFull-text availableInnovative Machine Learning Solutions: Investigating Algorithms and ApplicationsJune 2024 · Journal of Applied Engineering & Technology (JAET) Sayed Mazhar Ali ShahAssadullah Soomro Mushtaque Ahmed Rahu[...] Sarang KarimThis comprehensive review paper provides a thorough examination of the ever-evolving landscape of machine learning (ML), spanning from its historical origins to contemporary applications, challenges, and future prospects. It begins by elucidating the foundational concepts of machine learning, encompassing the diverse types, key terminology, and the intricate pipeline involved in the machine ... [Show full abstract] learning process. Delving into its historical perspective, the paper chronicles the development of machine learning, tracing its roots in artificial intelligence and highlighting key milestones and influential researchers who have shaped its trajectory. The core of this review explores an array of machine learning algorithms and techniques, spanning regression, classification, clustering, dimensionality reduction, deep learning, and ensemble methods. These algorithms are contextualized with real-world applications, ranging from healthcare to finance, natural language processing (NLP), computer vision, recommender systems, and robotics. Each application domain is buttressed with illustrative examples and case studies. In recognizing the challenges and open problems that confront machine learning, the review delves into issues pertaining to data quality, model interpretability, bias, ethics, generalization, and overfitting. Moreover, it identifies pressing research questions and areas where advancements are needed. Recent trends and developments in machine learning, including transfer learning, explainable AI, federated learning, reinforcement learning, and ethical considerations, are also highlighted to provide a glimpse into the evolving landscape. The paper culminates in a thought-provoking discussion on the future of machine learning, its potential societal impact, and its transformative role across industries. In summary, this review amalgamates key findings and insights, offering a comprehensive view of machine learning's multifaceted journey, from its inception to its promising future.View full-textChapterFull-text availableA SWOT Analysis for Healthcare Using Machine LearningMarch 2023 Zineb Sabouri Noreddine Gherabi Hakim El Massari[...] Amnai MohamedMachine learning (ML) applications are used in variety of real-world situations, and they are proving a big impact on the healthcare sector. It has become a reality in clinical practice. ML algorithms are applied to examine disease predictions and medical records. The healthcare data can be utilized to find the best trial sample, acquire additional data points, evaluate ongoing data from study ... [Show full abstract] participants, and avoid data-based errors. Many recent efforts have aided the adoption of machine learning techniques in the medical sector to allow healthcare providers to focus on patient care rather than searching information. Most of the existing ML techniques have external and internal drawbacks that prevent their ultimate implementation in the clinical domain and various concepts related to ML need to be implemented in the medical studies so that health care practitioners can effectively interpret and guide research in this field. For this reasons, this paper analyzes the present state of ML, as applied to healthcare in a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats (SWOT) analysis.View full-textChapterMachine Learning and HealthcareJune 2023 Manjula Devi C.I. DharaniA. SrinivasanThe healthcare sector is one that is continuously changing. It can be challenging for healthcare workers to keep up with the constant development of new tools and treatments. One of the most well-known terms in healthcare in recent years is machine learning technology. The use of machine learning technology in healthcare is expected to continue to grow in the coming years, as more data becomes ... [Show full abstract] available and new applications are developed.Read moreArticleLeveraging Cloud Computing for Advanced AI-Driven Biomedical Healthcare SystemsJuly 2024 · Tuijin Jishu/Journal of Propulsion Technology Biswajit BrahmaParmita PrangyaThe use of AI is expanding quickly in the healthcare industry, and several AI programs have been designed to address the most critical issues faced by healthcare providers today. Leaders in the health care industry must be well-versed in artificial intelligence (AI) and its potential applications in enhancing the quality, safety, and accessibility of treatment to patients in order to realize the ... [Show full abstract] goal of value-based medicine. This article serves as a primer on artificial intelligence (AI) technologies including machine learning, NLP, and AI voice assistants, as well as their appropriate use in the medical field. Further, it offers actionable advice to guide policymakers in crafting an AI strategy that can facilitate digital healthcare transformation. There is a lot of faith that artificial intelligence (AI) can revolutionize the healthcare industry in every way, from diagnosis to therapy. The overwhelming consensus is that AI technologies will complement and improve human efforts rather than displacing them. Healthcare workers may rely on AI for assistance with a wide range of jobs, including routine administrative work, clinical documentation, patient outreach, and more specialist areas like image analysis, medical device automation, and patient monitoring. Both direct healthcare applications and those throughout the healthcare value chain, such as drug discovery and ambient assisted living, will be explored in this chapter as some of the most significant uses of artificial intelligence in the healthcare industry today.Read moreLast Updated: 22 Oct 2024Interested in research on Health Care Sector?Join ResearchGate to discover and stay up-to-date with the latest research from leading experts in Health Care Sector and many other scientific topics.Join for free ResearchGate iOS AppGet it from the App Store now.InstallKeep up with your stats and moreAccess scientific knowledge from anywhere orDiscover by subject areaRecruit researchersJoin for freeLoginEmail Tip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inorContinue with GoogleWelcome back! Please log in.Email · HintTip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inorContinue with GoogleNo account? Sign upCompanyAbout usNewsCareersSupportHelp CenterBusiness solutionsAdvertisingRecruiting© 2008-2024 ResearchGate GmbH. All rights reserved.TermsPrivacyCopyrightImprintConsent preferences